# RFC 0

| Canonical Title: Design Of Scalable Memory Type For Bit And Byte Manipulation
| Slug: scalable-heterogeneous-memory-operations-type
| Tags: #bits #bytes #memory #operations #scalable #portable

> Covers the design choices of the reusable memory type irregardless of host
    language or available API design implements in that language (portable).

## Rationale

The reusable memory type is supposed to be a reference implementation of a set
of desired features for a type that operates on memory.

The base API should be as cross-language as possible, most likely mimicking the
feature set of C. Additional convenience layers can be built atop this layer for
each language thereafter.

Correctness over efficiency. `bytearray` after `list[int]`

## Prior Art

Nearly everything just uses integers with bit shifting due to not having an
ability to directly address bits. This is for good reason since bit slices that
are not a multiple of 8 bits are impossible to express without knowing some
additional context. Specifically, 3 bits do not fill 1 byte. This means that
there will be 5 bits of padding either on the left or right of those bits and
this will change depending on context. When reading files, those 3 bits would be
packed to the far left with the next meaningful (non-padding) bits directly
adjacent to them. When in memory, those 3 bits need to either be packed into the
higher or lower half of a byte. Not all values are numeric.

Is there ever a reason to unpack fewer than a multiple of 8 bits into the higher
end? Does that even make sense?

<- I don't think so. But this should be documented

So that leaves us with working with fewer than a multiple of 8 bits in memory
using a `bytes` type or perhaps integers if they fit.

Wait. `bytes` could refer to the first few bytes of a file. 😑

`bytearray(bytes([0, 0, 0]))`
`bytearray(b'\x00')`

Indexing a nested memory type always starts from leftmost bit because nested
fields could be numbers and numbers could be little endian. Random access into
a packed/padded type has no meaning unless it's from left to right.

How to nest Mem types in Rust traits? Possibly: Mem -> Nest, Mem -> Num
Perhaps traits could be defined for each of the operations like indexing.

### Indexing

For bits, first bit is always far left.

For big endian numbers the first bit is always the rightmost bit of the
rightmost byte and the rightmost bit of the leftmost byte when little endian.

You can interpret a number as bits to ignore number concept semantics. One
example could be getting the sign by casting an i32le to bytes then getting the
first bit!

```
Memory:
    Byte Order: Left-To-Right
    Bit Order: Left-To-Right

Numbers:
    Byte Order: Left-To-Right or Right-To-Left per endianness
    Bit Order: Right-To-Left
```

### Marshalling

In-memory storage for bits should use `[u8]` (an array of unsigned bytes).

In-memory numbers should use `[u8]` but indexing operations are tracked
differently.

### Operations

Setting the first bit must track endianness and right-to-left order for numeric
types as well as byte order.

### Nested Memory Types And Padding & Alignment

Padding can refer to bit or byte padding, although byte padding is just 8 bits.

Alignment can change depending on padding.

Certain memory operations cannot happen when structs are packed. For example, a
3 bit bit-field cannot be operated on without conditional logic gate-keeping
access to it. By using padding, the alignment changes and more overall memory is
used, but these tiny fields can be directly accessed for memory operations. It's
possible to use masking and several rounds of bitwise ORs to directly operate on
a 3 bit bit-field but this is more overall instructions.

---

```python
class Mem: ...
class Num(Mem): ...  # Indexing is different
class Float(Mem): ...  # Indexing is same, but contains Num exp and mantissa
class I32(Num): ...  # Operations are different
class U32(Num): ...  # Operations are different
```

```
-- Perhaps these could be the names of the libraries?
memory-types
memory-concepts
```
